# examples
This folder is dedicated to all "example" `hypervms` that we build to showcase
the capability of the `hypersdk`. If you are interested in writing your own
`hypervm`, this is usally the right place to start.

## Beginner: `tokenvm`
We created the [`tokenvm`](./tokenvm) to showcase how to use the
`hypersdk` in an application most readers are already familiar with, token minting
and token trading. The `tokenvm` lets anyone create any asset, mint more of
their asset, modify the metadata of their asset (if they reveal some info), and
burn their asset. Additionally, there is an embedded on-chain exchange that
allows anyone to create orders and fill (partial) orders of anyone else. To
make this example easy to play with, the `tokenvm` also bundles a powerful CLI
tool and serves RPC requests for trades out of an in-memory order book it
maintains by syncing blocks. If you are interested in the intersection of
exchanges and blockchains, it is definitely worth a read (the logic for filling
orders is < 100 lines of code!).

To ensure the `hypersdk` stays reliable as we optimize and evolve the codebase,
we also run E2E tests in the `tokenvm` on each PR to the `hypersdk` core modules.

## Expert: `indexvm`
The [`indexvm`](https://github.com/ava-labs/indexvm) is much more complex than
the `tokenvm` (more elaborate mechanisms and a new use case you may not be
familiar with). It was built during the design of the `hypersdk` to test out the
limits of the abstractions for building complex on-chain mechanisms. We recommend
taking a look at this `hypervm` once you already have familiarity with the `hypersdk` to gain an
even deeper understanding of how you can build a complex runtime on top of the `hypersdk`.

The `indexvm` is dedicated to increasing the usefulness of the world's
content-addressable data (like IPFS) by enabling anyone to "index it" by
providing useful annotations (i.e. ratings, abuse reports, etc.) on it.
Think up/down vote on any static file on the decentralized web.

The transparent data feed generated by interactions on the `indexvm` can
then be used by any third-party (or yourself) to build an AI/recommender
system to curate things people might find interesting, based on their
previous interactions/annotations.

Less technical plz? Think TikTok/StumbleUpon over arbitrary IPFS data (like NFTs) but
all your previous likes (across all services you've ever used) can be used to
generate the next content recommendation for you.

The fastest way to expedite the transition to a decentralized web is to make it
more fun and more useful than the existing web. The `indexvm` hopes to play
a small part in this movement by making it easier for anyone to generate
world-class recommendations for anyone on the internet, even if you've never
interacted with them before.

## Future Work
### storagevm
It would be great to create a `hypervm` dedicated to the storage of arbitrary
data blobs (maybe up to 64KB) that could be used by different on-chain
applications, like NFTs, to store large data (which may utilize many data blobs on-chain).

This `hypervm` should put the raw data blobs in each block but only store the
hash in state (so that anyone syncing the network does not need to state sync
everything in it). Nodes can then best-effort/selectively store the content
that matters to them. We can additionally add some sort of DHT that could be
used to locate chunks across the network (if they are still held by anyone).

If we got ambitious, we could implement some sort of mechanism to perform
random checks on the participants to ensure they hold certain pieces of data
at a certain time (usually be requiring a node to hash some request payload
with the raw file content). Maybe this could be "file submitter driven" and
used to slash some host stake if they don't respond fast enough by re-inserting
content on-chain.

It would also be a good idea to add a "censor" key that could be used to remove
content or ban accounts that post malicious information.
